after 3 months of Devastation
displacement and the killing of
Palestinians we're taking a deep dive
into the way the story of Gaza has been
covered a journalist an expert on human
rights and another on digital rights on
what has taken place the humanitarian
catastrophe and the way the media
through their news coverage have helped
pave the way to a
genocide
[Music]
since the attacks on October 7th the
listening post has interviewed a range
of experts on the news coverage what's
missing in it and how it has helped
enable the crimes being waged on
Palestinians in Gaza in this special
edition we have compiled three
interviews starting with the United
Nations special raor on the occupied
Palestinian territories Francesca Alban
Alban is an Italian trained in
international law she's been
highlighting the duty of journalists to
remember and include the context of this
story as well as what international law
says about the rights and
responsibilities of the occupier and the
occupied long before October 7th she was
the target of smear campaigns calls for
her dismissal from the UN not one to be
silenced she has gone in the other
direction chastising journalists around
the world for their biases and the UN
for its inaction I started out by asking
Al V to tell us about some of the
interactions she has had with reporters
on this story and what those exchanges
have
revealed uh hi Richard uh it's uneven
because I have to say that there are
there have been a few journalists who
have really tried to do um good job good
coverage asking me sort of neutral
questions to appreciate the facts but
mostly I've had um a difficult
experience with uh mainstream media in
the west because I found I found myself
in the uncomfortable position of being
challenged on how I would call things or
how I would report on things no it's not
a Trope it's really real so it seems not
to understand what I'm saying there is
an apartheid regime no I'm serious there
is an apartheid regime it's domination
this is not a Trope this is
international law I mean it was not my
intention to challenge journalists but
it seems that they really wanted to to
to to challenge my way of looking at
things which I found disturbing because
again excuse me but I'm I'm here to
report on on things that I've analyzed
verified triangulated
and yeah I found it a bit surprising
that relates to something that you've
said about today's political landscape
you say it's marked by historical
Amnesia traditional media plays a
critical role in that and that many
people are living in an alternative
reality what do you mean exactly by that
yes yes Richard because this is not just
a conflict and calling calling it just a
conflict is a is a Mis Noma because this
is an occupation that has been ongoing
for 56 years so very limited uh
consideration for that but also Al very
limited consideration for the enduring
trauma that also the Palestinians have
in themselves because um while there is
recognition for the the the tragedy that
the Jewish people have lived through and
through across centuries that culminated
in the horror of the Holocaust there is
very little recognition of what the
Palestinians has had endured as a people
since
1947 since the and and through the
creation of the state of Israel they
were never allowed to come to a closure
and again this is not about Hamas this
is really the Palestinian as a people as
they try to resist a violent occupation
in the occupied pal Palestinian
territory there is no Hamas military
presence in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and still over 200 people have
been killed by soldiers and armed the
settlers do you see any connection to it
in in mainstream media Palestinians have
heard the calls as we have from Israeli
officials and voices in the Israeli
media for what amounts to ethnic
cleansing of Gaza as a lawyer are you
surprised by the evidence that they are
willingly providing of what appears to
be the intent to commit what are in fact
war crimes there seems to be this sense
of impunity over their words it's
surprising yes because the Israelis have
never been so explicit in admitting
respons responsibility for specific
incidents one of the things that were
absolutely shocking was the the bombing
of the jabalia refugee camp because the
Israeli Army knew that there were about
400 civilians Palestinian civilians
including hostages and nonetheless the
camp was bombed heavily and hundreds of
Palestinians were killed hundreds were
injured and the number of hostages was
reportedly killed in that case so yeah
theyve been quite outspoken about their
intention including calling for the
Erasure of Gaza the flattening of
Gaza we have seen before what happens to
people when this this Fury becomes
becomes popular and this genocidal call
that we have heard from politicians and
and military leaders in Israel is also
Amplified in various groups in the
Israeli
Society so in the face of this
madness as someone who has
seen genocidal horror happening in other
parts of the world I say it's clear that
this has this has is taking the Israel
Society to a very dark place and this is
why I say in the interest of the pales
both Palestinians and the Israelis This
Must Be Stopped you've faced a lot of
criticism um for some of the things that
you've said and you faced some of that
criticism prior to October 7th some
cases you've been defamed pressure
groups have been on your case to resign
what kind of things are they saying
about you are they succeeding M Alban in
making your job more difficult look this
group groups and they I mean they're all
connected one way or another because
they say exactly the same things that
are repeated exactly in the same way
sometime sometimes in the same sequence
over and over and the accusations
against me are that I'm an anti-semite
that I am Pro Hamas and I support
terrorism Franchesca Alban is someone
who pretends to be neutral uh neither
her position nor her own background have
anything to do with impartiality is it
succeeding I don't think so because
eventually more and more people keep on
asking me to to speak and to speak out
wherever I go uh speaking to governments
or speaking to the media off record
people know people tell me or let me
understand that the situation is better
known that it would seem in the public
debate but there is a lot of censorship
and self-censorship because people don't
want to be confronted with the
allegations I I have to face on a daily
basis which in my case don't distract me
I keep focused on what I have to do but
I think that it's necessary to tackle
this issue at the global level because
it's uh it's now also the weaponization
of anti-Semitism and the level of smear
against anyone who UTS a word of
criticism against Israel and everyone
who utters a word of solidarity with the
Palestinians face such a huge and evil
um campaign I mean I also spoke with you
know human rights defenders in the
Pacific Islands where they say well you
we Face even arrest and detention if we
come out and protest in solidarity with
the Palestinian people against what's
happening in the Gaza Strip so there is
a crashing of freedom of assembly a
crashing of freedom of of expression and
of the right to protest that it's
absolutely unprecedented at this Global
level and of this scale Franchesca
albanesa un special raor for the
occupied Palestinian territories you're
up against it uh we understand you're
very busy we're very grateful for the
time that you've made for us today thank
you
Richard the blockade of the Gaza Strip
is both physical and digital Israel has
forced periodic Communications blackouts
on Gaza it has the power to do that and
social media a key information source is
now brimming with disinformation and
hate speech big Tech has been taking
down content and its sensitivities on
this story seem to reflect Israel's
Palestinian voices have often been muted
that is where we began with marwa fataa
of the digital Rights group access now
on the information siege that Israelis
have imposed on God
AA uh Palestinians in Gaza are under a
Complete Siege and there is of course a
near complete information Blackout um
during Israel's uh bombardment campaign
of the Gaza Strip um two of the three
main telecommunications lines or
companies in the Gaza Strip have been
bombarded um people are relying
currently on only one line of
communications with internet and
Telecommunications disruptions um that
means that people in Gaza are not able
to access information not able to check
on their loved ones they're not able to
seek life saving information and they're
cut off from the world um they have
fewer and fewer opportunities to share
and tell their stories and to document
human rights abuses and and war crimes
internet shutdowns provide a convenient
cover for perpetrators of atrocities of
Human Rights abuses uh to commit those
in in the dark uh to cover the betrayals
of their crimes uh and to um impede or
hinder any future possibility of
accountability and and Justice in the
first half of this program we examine
some of the genocidal rhetoric that's
been coming from Israeli officials and
other Israeli figures how much of that
language are you seeing being mirrored
online the calls for violence the
unverified claims there is a barage of
um hate speech incitement to violence
content that is uh dehumanizing of
Palestinians islamophobic content um
anti-semitic content and that is all
circulating unfortunately uh with little
moderation uh from social media
companies there are of course many
utterances from Israeli officials on
social media um that shows their clear
intent on committing genocide including
for instance most recently uh by prime
minister Netanyahu on X formerly known
as Twitter that this fight and this war
is a war between children of lightness
and Children Of Darkness between
humanity and the law of uh of of jungle
and it raises a question about to what
extent social media companies are
complicit in entertaining and housing
and amplifying uh these genocidal um
rhetorics that are clearly in violation
of international humanitarian law and
international law in General on that
point since hamas's attack on October
7th we've seen the Israeli government
flood social media with ads with graphic
and provocative imagery what are you
seeing there on that side of things and
how willingly have these online
platforms played host to Israeli
government messaging since hamas's
attack on on Israel on October 7th um
the Israeli government has launched a
social media campaign I would say an
aggressive iive social media campaign to
um shape the narrative and the
conversation online um we've seen for
example the Israeli Ministry of Foreign
Affairs had run up to 86 ads on YouTube
uh some of which shows indeed graphic
content um equating Hamas to Isis and
also showing the the impact of of the
attacks and it's clear that you know
paid targeted
advertisement uh has become a weapon of
War governments that have the resources
and the capacity to produce uh such
material can use these Platforms in
order to spread War propaganda and in
this context to justify the collective
punishment of Palestinians and um war
crimes and work you know crimes against
humanity that we see unfolding before
before our eyes Palestinians are also
saying that social media companies have
been taking down their content
threatening to close their accounts some
say they're being sh Shadow band
outright tell us what examples you're
seeing and are these acts of censorship
on these various platforms affecting
voices on both sides we've seen users
accounts being shut down including very
notable users and journalists whose
voices are very important there's also
been AR arbitary decisions um made and
when when it comes to removing content
one major concern that is repeatedly
being reported is the so-called Shadow
Banning and whereas company don't really
use that term um I've witnessed it
myself uh and I've seen many users
reporting it that you know their their
content is being uh demoted uh down
ranked the engagement with this content
is is significantly reduced in
comparison to other content not related
to Palestine
unfortunately we thought that in 2021
we've settled matters as in it was clear
um that this systematic and
discriminatory approach to moderating
Palestinian content has been exposed um
there's no way for platforms to G gasl
light users or Civil Society
organizations that this is uh just a
result of a technical glitch which
surprisingly we don't see in other
crisis like when Russia invaded uh
Ukraine we have seen actually
proactive uh statements from different
companies uh uh stating their unwavering
commitment to upholding ukrainians right
to freedom of expression
such commitment to human rights have not
been extended to Palestinians despite of
what companies claim the users
experience and the reality of what we've
uh documenting uh States otherwise Mara
of access now thank you for speaking
with us today here at the listening post
thank
you Israel has said that its goal in
Gaza is to destroy Hamas but its attacks
on Palestinians have also escalated on
the West Bank where Hamas has no
Authority or military presence that
violence is usually provoked by Israeli
settlers prior to October 7th almost 200
Palestinians had been killed on the West
Bank in the previous 10 months that
number has more than doubled since
Mariam baruti is a Palestinian
journalist based in ramala on the West
Bank she's been interviewed by multiple
media outlets and some of those
exchanges like this one with the UK
Channel Sky News have been heated dozens
of pal Ians are killed we call it a
Slaughter we have called it a Massac
this time because yeah no no I'm talking
about individual but could you just
answer if you would like to talk atast
come with me with the right information
please I began by asking Mariam baruti
about what she's seen in the western
media's coverage of this
story The Way International journalists
attempt to tro Palestinians and
delegitimize as well as deny the crimes
against them has has not only become
vicious in in the way that journalists
are framing it like that interview but
it has increased and become lethal in a
way that it is a complete pro- genocidal
stance by journalists that claim to be
um objective that claim to be
nonpartisan that claim to be supporting
um the truth to support accurate
accuracy for their audiences but but
it's not just common it is being
encouraged by editors and policy makers
whether directly or indirectly so you
don't see that as someone not fully
understanding the context and bringing
the context to the interview you see
that more as an
intention absolutely as journalists it
is our job to do our due diligence prior
to bringing in anyone who is giving a
testimony um so to claim ignorance
requires you to quit your job and go and
learn since October 7th uh journalists
from around the world have flown into
the into the region a lot of them are
still based in Israel some of them have
embedded with the Israeli military to
get into Gaza how difficult is it for
journalists to get into the West Bank
and for those who haven't been to the
West Bank to cover the story what are
they
missing It's relatively difficult ult
for journalists to enter the West Bank
only in comparison to previous times but
Israel is placing restrictions and is
assigning things like minders to
different Bureau Chiefs and
international reporters in the region
and that is someone that responds and
operates under the command of the
Israeli military to attempt and coer
manipulate um as well as pressure
journalists to cover in a certain angle
or to deny information from audiences
but nonetheless journalists still have
the capacity to challenge this and come
into the West Bank the persons that they
are bringing on to speak on the
situation are the very people that are
committing the crimes against
Palestinians that is Israeli military
spokespersons um that is Israeli policy
makers and settlers and at the same time
negating the Palestinian testimony and
if they do speak with Palestinians it is
always an attempt to frame a two- Sidis
but there is no two sides to this not
just because it's a false equivalent
between colonized or and colonized but
because journalists are only showing one
side and that is the Israeli side and
unfortunately what we have seen more
than that is a negation and a denial of
the information and news that local
journalists have as though that is
inferior rather than recognizing that
local journalists are the experts on
this situation even though their lives
are at increased risk um from Israeli
repression as we have seen in their
targeting in many Western and
international media Med Outlet simply
brand this as a war between Israel and
Hamas how accurate is that framing given
everything that we've been hearing from
Israeli officials on the record
targeting civilians in Gaza how accurate
is the framing how dangerous is
it it is so dangerous to take what is
happening to Palestinians and reduce it
to the title of an Hamas Israel war this
is not a war between Hamas and Israel
this is a war against Palestinians in
all um geographical locations within
Palestine as well as outside of
Palestine reminding that 50% of the
population is in forced Exile um or our
refugees abroad so to frame it as that
is a reductionist approach and it is an
attempt to continue the illustration of
Palestinians as terrorists because of
the the association that was made of
what Hamas is we see the isra military
they closed down a printing shop
downtown rala just this morning and the
flyer on the door that they plastered
was Hamas equals Isis so it goes to show
you how manipulative that narrative is
and then there's no mention of G being
besieged for close to two decades
there's no mention of the same thing
happening in G right now has happened
before at a smaller scale because what
we have seen is transcending all trends
of violence that we pass alians have
witnessed or we have witnessed in the
region since
1948 so to claim that it is a Hamas and
Israel war is either an inability to
actually do the due diligence and look
into the context and explain that to
your audience or it is intentional and
that means you are being complicit in
genocide one last question for you we've
seen some amazing journalism coming out
of Gaza Palestinians too many of whom
have paid with their lives uh making a
name for themselves getting the
recognition that they deserve can you
give us a few names of some good follows
of Palestinian journalists on the West
Bank people whose work is worthy of our
following it's so difficult to speak
about journalists here tell about it
considering just the targeting yeah it's
heartache and and as a reporter you know
I think we forget that these are our
peers and it also you know we're not
advocating just for the protection of
journalists but as reporters and
journalists we're advocating for
ourselves um to to remain
safe but in terms of coverage I think
there are multiple reporters and news
organizations that are actually going
against the grain and going against the
restrictions that are being imposed by
by editorial policies abroad at least
alzer has been doing incredible coverage
um of what's been happening all across
Palestine not just LDA and the West Bank
but in its entire context we there are
organizations such as mwise which has
also been reporting excellent um in
print uh on the West Bank we have Middle
East I that has also been showcasing
excellent reporting on the West Bank as
well as highlighting and covering the
disinformation and mistranslation that
has been happening within International
media
organizations but I mean in in terms of
individuals you can see the works of
people like
fatan uh you can see the works of
Muhammad Al although he is not here but
he is able to amplify a lot of the
coverage that is being sent from local
journalists abroad but yeah I'm sorry I
don't have maybe too specific specific
names that's fine that's fine Mariam
baruti thank you for joining us today
here at the listening post thank you for
having
me you've been watching a special
edition of our program a compilation of
our most informative and at times
heartfelt interviews on Israel's
genocidal assault on the Gaza Strip
we'll stay on this story to see where it
goes from here and how it's reported and
we'll see you next time here at the
listening
post